---
layout: page
permalink: /firstyear/
title: Reflections on my first year 
order: 6
nav: false
hidden: false
description: 
---

I guess the best way to summarize my first year of Econ PhD is “you don’t know how fast you were going until you stop”. It has been 27 days since my last core exam, and I am currently in an awkward limbo between my first and second year. Much to my own surprise, I passed all three of my core exams on the first try. I got my results on Friday July 7. I was in Madison, WI visiting my sister for a week. We had rented a car and were taking a day trip to Devil’s Lake State Park. I was in the driver’s seat of a silver Kia Sportage, parked outside of a random Walgreens (we made a pitstop to buy water, bug repellent and snacks), when I opened the email. I think my first reaction was surprise, followed by relief, and then incredulity. Imposter syndrome flooded me within 10 seconds of opening the email. I was almost convinced that the committee had made some mistake, that they mixed something up, that I wasn’t supposed to pass all three core exams. I began pouring out some bottled-up thoughts I’ve collected throughout the year to my sister. I felt like I didn’t deserve to pass given how I bad I felt after some of the exams. I felt especially disappointed in my performance for the macro core exam, which was my declared field of interest. I didn’t feel like I was as smart or knowledgeable as my classmates who passed. For some of my peers, it was their second time taking graduate-level economics classes, so they were comfortable with the material. For me, things didn’t click automatically, but I also felt bad for making excuses for myself (e.g. I never took differential equations or analysis, the level of difficulty of my undergrad statistics class would make people laugh, etc). I felt like my knowledge of the content wasn’t “deep” enough compared to those of my peers — maybe it was enough to pass the cores, but if you put me on the spot and asked me a question about something I learned, I am not confident that I would be able to answer it well. Worst of all, I felt like some people around me didn’t expect me to pass all three on the first try. It took a while for me to accept the fact that I have passed, that I deserve to be here and continue my PhD, and to be happy about it. 

After I got back from Madison, I had a hard time adjusting to exam-less class-less life in Atlanta. Two things were quite worrisome. First, I lost my appetite in the morning. I had always been a big breakfast person, so it was quite alarming when the thought of eating something in the morning made me feel unpleasant and even somewhat nauseous. Maybe it’s induced by stress and anxiety (but what is there to be stressed and anxious about now?), or my lack of a regular sleep schedule and/or failure to implement one during the summer, or some body image insecurities. I tried shifting my dinners earlier, making protein smoothies instead of my usual sandwiches, trying to follow a regular sleep schedule, get more sunshine, etc, but it’s still a work in progress. 

Second, I started experiencing mild insomnia. The funny thing is that I slept better on an air mattress in my sister’s living room in Madison than I did in my own bed back in Atlanta. For the better or for the worse, ever since I got a Fitbit in high school, I’ve been pretty obsessed with my sleep. Perhaps it’s the quantitative side of me, excited to be able to measure, quantify and see trends in the number of hours I slept, the duration of deep sleep, etc. Sleep is also an important factor of my day-to-day life — the quality and duration of sleep I got dictated my mood, productivity, and performance the next day. I’m proud that I’ve been able to get an average of 7 hours of sleep throughout the past year, and was looking forward to getting better sleep during the summer when I had less things to do and worry about. The reality was quite different — I would lie in bed for at least an hour, trying my best to fall asleep. During the school year, melatonin was something I could fall back on and take when I had an exam the next day or during the few days of hormonal induced insomnia every month. I try hard to not make taking melatonin a habit, especially after I experienced bad nausea in the morning (imagine me stopping to retch on my walk to my 8am class and eating sour candy to control the nausea) when I took it for a consecutive period of time during math camp. The thing about melatonin is that it’s not really a sleeping pill, it works best if you take it ~1 hour prior to going to bed. Nowadays, I make a resolution not to take melatonin before I go to bed, but end up going against it when I reach for the now half-empty bottle on my desk when I am one hour into my sleeplessness. I feel bad for not being able to fall asleep during this stress-free period. My brain wanders incessantly, overthinking things that happened today, getting anxious about things that probably will not happen, and imagining scenarios months from now. 

I told my sister about my struggles, she advised me to go see a doctor, a suggestion I didn’t take seriously. I was hesitant to tell my parents (asian parents tend to trivialize certain health problems), but was surprisingly comforted by my dad’s response when I finally decided to tell him. In sum, he said that my first year was very exhausting and stressful — my brain was working at 100mph for months  at high stress levels — but I probably got used to it. When exams were over, everything came to a stop. My brain is now working at 20mph, and it doesn’t know what to do because it was used to working at such high levels. Although I try to find things to do and stay productive, I feel like I don’t use my brain enough during the day to tire it out at night (which is a probable reason why I’m thinking a lot when I’m lying in bed and can’t fall asleep). In sum, my body is still recovering from the damages of my first year. My dad also has his PhD in economics, so it was consoling to hear this from him. It made my feelings and struggles feel more validated, that I wasn’t just some delicate gen Z snowflake complaining about how hard the first year of grad school was. So now when people ask me what I’m up to this summer, I smile wryly and say “recovering from my first year, and getting ready for the next”. 
